<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-sentry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sentry</h2>
			<p>
				<span>We’d found an old Boche dug-out, and he knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave us hell, for shell on frantic shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammered on top, but never quite burst through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rain, guttering down in waterfalls of slime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept slush waist high, that rising hour by hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choked up the steps too thick with clay to climb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What murk of air remained stank old, and sour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fumes of whizz-bangs, and the smell of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who’d lived there years, and left their curse in the den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If not their corpses. …</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">There we herded from the blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whizz-bangs, but one found our door at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buffeting eyes and breath, snuffing the candles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thud! flump! thud! down the steep steps came thumping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And splashing in the flood, deluging muck⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sentry’s body; then his rifle, handles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of old Boche bombs, and mud in ruck on ruck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We dredged him up, for killed, until he whined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O sir, my eyes⁠—I’m blind⁠—I’m blind, I’m blind!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coaxing, I held a flame against his lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said if he could see the least blurred light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was not blind; in time he’d get all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I can’t,” he sobbed. Eyeballs, huge-bulged like squids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch my dreams still; but I forgot him there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In posting next for duty, and sending a scout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beg a stretcher somewhere, and floundering about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To other posts under the shrieking air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those other wretches, how they bled and spewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one who would have drowned himself for good⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I try not to remember these things now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let dread hark back for one word only: how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-listening to that sentry’s moans and jumps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wild chattering of his broken teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renewed most horribly whenever crumps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pummelled the roof and slogged the air beneath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dense din, I say, we heard him shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I see your lights!” But ours had long died out.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-chances" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Chances</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I mind as ’ow the night afore that show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us five got talking⁠—we was in the know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Over the top to-morrer; boys, we’re for it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First wave we are, first ruddy wave; that’s tore it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah well,” says Jimmy⁠—an’ ’e’s seen some scrappin’⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There ain’t more nor five things as can ’appen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye get knocked out; else wounded⁠—bad or cushy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scuppered; or nowt except yer feeling mushy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One of us got the knock-out, blown to chops.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’other was hurt, like, losin’ both ’is props.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ one, to use the word of ’ypocrites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Ad the misfortoon to be took by Fritz.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now me, I wasn’t scratched, praise God Almighty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Though next time please I’ll thank ’im for a blighty),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But poor young Jim, ’e’s livin’ an’ ’e’s not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’E reckoned ’e’d five chances, an’ ’e’s ’ad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’E’s wounded, killed, and pris’ner, all the lot⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruddy lot all rolled in one. Jim’s mad.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="anthem-for-doomed-youth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Anthem for Doomed Youth</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What passing-bells for these who die as cattle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only the monstrous anger of the guns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only the stuttering rifles’ rapid rattle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can patter out their hasty orisons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No mockeries for them; no prayers nor bells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any voice of mourning save the choirs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shrill, demented choirs of wailing shells;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bugles calling for them from sad shires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What candles may be held to speed them all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not in the hands of boys, but in their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall shine the holy glimmers of goodbyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pallor of girls’ brows shall be their pall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their flowers the tenderness of patient minds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each slow dusk a drawing-down of blinds.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="apologia-pro-poemate-meo" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Apologia Pro Poemate Meo</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I, too, saw God through mud⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The mud that cracked on cheeks when wretches smiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">War brought more glory to their eyes than blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And gave their laughs more glee than shakes a child.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Merry it was to laugh there⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where death becomes absurd and life absurder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For power was on us as we slashed bones bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Not to feel sickness or remorse of murder.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I, too, have dropped off fear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Behind the barrage, dead as my platoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And sailed my spirit surging, light and clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Past the entanglement where hopes lay strewn;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And witnessed exultation⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Faces that used to curse me, scowl for scowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Shine and lift up with passion of oblation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Seraphic for an hour; though they were foul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have made fellowships⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Untold of happy lovers in old song.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For love is not the binding of fair lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With the soft silk of eyes that look and long,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By Joy, whose ribbon slips⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But wound with war’s hard wire whose stakes are strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Bound with the bandage of the arm that drips;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Knit in the welding of the rifle-thong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have perceived much beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the hoarse oaths that kept our courage straight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Heard music in the silentness of duty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Found peace where shell-storms spouted reddest spate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nevertheless, except you share</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With them in hell the sorrowful dark of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whose world is but the trembling of a flare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And heaven but as the highway for a shell,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You shall not hear their mirth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">You shall not come to think them well content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By any jest of mine. These men are worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Your tears: You are not worth their merriment.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>
					<time datetime="1917-11">November 1917.</time>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="wild-with-all-regrets" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Wild with All Regrets</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">(Another Version of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">A Terre</i>.)</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="dedication">To Siegfried Sassoon</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>My arms have mutinied against me⁠—brutes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fingers fidget like ten idle brats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My back’s been stiff for hours, damned hours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death never gives his squad a Stand-at-ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t read. There: it’s no use. Take your book.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A short life and a merry one, my buck!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We said we’d hate to grow dead old. But now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to live old seems awful: not to renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My boyhood with my boys, and teach ’em hitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shooting and hunting⁠—all the arts of hurting!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Well, that’s what I learnt. That, and making money.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fifty years in store seem none too many;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’ve five minutes. God! For just two years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To help myself to this good air of yours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One Spring! Is one too hard to spare? Too long?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring air would find its own way to my lung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grow me legs as quick as lilac-shoots.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, there’s the orderly. He’ll change the sheets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I’m lugged out, oh, couldn’t I do that?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in this coffin of a bed, I’ve thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d like to kneel and sweep his floors for ever⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask no nights off when the bustle’s over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I’d enjoy the dirt; who’s prejudiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a grimed hand when his own’s quite dust⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less live than specks that in the sun-shafts turn?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear dust⁠—in rooms, on roads, on faces’ tan!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d love to be a sweep’s boy, black as Town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, or a muckman. Must I be his load?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A flea would do. If one chap wasn’t bloody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or went stone-cold, I’d find another body.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Which I shan’t manage now. Unless it’s yours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall stay in you, friend, for some few hours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll feel my heavy spirit chill your chest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climb your throat on sobs, until it’s chased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sighs, and wiped from off your lips by wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I think on your rich breathing, brother, I’ll be weaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do without what blood remained me from my wound.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>
					<time datetime="1917-12-05">5th December 1917.</time>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-end" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The End</h2>
			<p>
				<span>After the blast of lightning from the east,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flourish of loud clouds, the Chariot throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the drums of time have rolled and ceased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the bronze west long retreat is blown,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shall Life renew these bodies? Of a truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All death will he annul, all tears assuage?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fill these void veins full again with youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wash with an immortal water age?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When I do ask white Age, he saith not so⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My head hangs weighed with snow.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when I hearken to the Earth she saith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My fiery heart sinks aching. It is death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine ancient scars shall not be glorified</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor my titanic tears the seas be dried.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dulce-et-decorum-est" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Dulce Et Decorum Est</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Bent double, like old beggars under sacks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knock-kneed, coughing like hags, we cursed through sludge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till on the haunting flares we turned our backs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And towards our distant rest began to trudge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men marched asleep. Many had lost their boots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But limped on, blood-shod. All went lame, all blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drunk with fatigue; deaf even to the hoots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gas-shells dropping softly behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gas! <strong>Gas!</strong> Quick, boys!⁠—An ecstasy of fumbling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But someone still was yelling out and stumbling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flound’ring like a man in fire or lime.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim through the misty panes and thick green light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As under a green sea, I saw him drowning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In all my dreams before my helpless sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plunges at me, guttering, choking, drowning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If in some smothering dreams, you too could pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the wagon that we flung him in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watch the white eyes writhing in his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hanging face, like a devil’s sick of sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you could hear, at every jolt, the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come gargling from the froth-corrupted lungs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitter as the cud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of vile, incurable sores on innocent tongues⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friend, you would not tell with such high zest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To children ardent for some desperate glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old Lie: <i xml:lang="la">Dulce et decorum est</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="la">Pro patria mori.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="insensibility" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Insensibility</h2>
			<section id="insensibility-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Happy are men who yet before they are killed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can let their veins run cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom no compassion fleers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or makes their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sore on the alleys cobbled with their brothers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The front line withers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they are troops who fade, not flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For poets’ tearful fooling:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men, gaps for filling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Losses who might have fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longer; but no one bothers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="insensibility-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And some cease feeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even themselves or for themselves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dullness best solves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tease and doubt of shelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Chance’s strange arithmetic</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes simpler than the reckoning of their shilling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They keep no check on Armies’ decimation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="insensibility-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Happy are these who lose imagination:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have enough to carry with ammunition.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their spirit drags no pack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their old wounds save with cold can not more ache.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having seen all things red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their eyes are rid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the hurt of the colour of blood for ever.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And terror’s first constriction over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hearts remain small drawn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their senses in some scorching cautery of battle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now long since ironed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can laugh among the dying, unconcerned.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="insensibility-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Happy the soldier home, with not a notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How somewhere, every dawn, some men attack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many sighs are drained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy the lad whose mind was never trained:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His days are worth forgetting more than not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sings along the march</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which we march taciturn, because of dusk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long, forlorn, relentless trend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From larger day to huger night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="insensibility-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We wise, who with a thought besmirch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blood over all our soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How should we see our task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through his blunt and lashless eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive, he is not vital overmuch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying, not mortal overmuch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sad, nor proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor curious at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cannot tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old men’s placidity from his.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="insensibility-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But cursed are dullards whom no cannon stuns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they should be as stones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wretched are they, and mean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With paucity that never was simplicity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By choice they made themselves immune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pity and whatever mourns in man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the last sea and the hapless stars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever mourns when many leave these shores;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever shares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eternal reciprocity of tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="conscious" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Conscious</h2>
			<p>
				<span>His fingers wake, and flutter up the bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes come open with a pull of will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helped by the yellow may-flowers by his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blind-cord drawls across the window-sill …</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How smooth the floor of the ward is! what a rug!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who’s that talking, somewhere out of sight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why are they laughing? What’s inside that jug?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nurse! Doctor!” “Yes; all right, all right.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But sudden dusk bewilders all the air⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There seems no time to want a drink of water.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nurse looks so far away. And everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Music and roses burnt through crimson slaughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold; cold; he’s cold; and yet so hot:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there’s no light to see the voices by⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No time to dream, and ask⁠—he knows not what.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="strange-meeting" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Strange Meeting</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It seemed that out of the battle I escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down some profound dull tunnel, long since scooped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through granites which Titanic wars had groined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet also there encumbered sleepers groaned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too fast in thought or death to be bestirred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as I probed them, one sprang up, and stared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With piteous recognition in fixed eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifting distressful hands as if to bless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by his smile, I knew that sullen hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a thousand fears that vision’s face was grained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet no blood reached there from the upper ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no guns thumped, or down the flues made moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Strange, friend,” I said, “Here is no cause to mourn.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“None,” said the other, “Save the undone years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hopelessness. Whatever hope is yours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was my life also; I went hunting wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the wildest beauty in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which lies not calm in eyes, or braided hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But mocks the steady running of the hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if it grieves, grieves richlier than here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by my glee might many men have laughed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of my weeping something has been left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which must die now. I mean the truth untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pity of war, the pity war distilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now men will go content with what we spoiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, discontent, boil bloody, and be spilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will be swift with swiftness of the tigress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None will break ranks, though nations trek from progress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courage was mine, and I had mystery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisdom was mine, and I had mastery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To miss the march of this retreating world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into vain citadels that are not walled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when much blood had clogged their chariot-wheels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would go up and wash them from sweet wells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even with truths that lie too deep for taint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would have poured my spirit without stint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not through wounds; not on the cess of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foreheads of men have bled where no wounds were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am the enemy you killed, my friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew you in this dark; for so you frowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yesterday through me as you jabbed and killed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I parried; but my hands were loath and cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us sleep now …”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="strange-meeting-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Strange Meeting</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Another Version</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Earth’s wheels run oiled with blood. Forget we that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us lie down and dig ourselves in thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty is yours and you have mastery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisdom is mine, and I have mystery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We two will stay behind and keep our troth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us forego men’s minds that are brute’s natures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us not sup the blood which some say nurtures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be we not swift with swiftness of the tigress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us break ranks from those who trek from progress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Miss we the march of this retreating world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into old citadels that are not walled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us lie out and hold the open truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then when their blood hath clogged the chariot wheels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will go up and wash them from deep wells.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What though we sink from men as pitchers falling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many shall raise us up to be their filling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even from wells we sunk too deep for war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And filled by brows that bled where no wounds were.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="arms-and-the-boy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Arms and the Boy</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Let the boy try along this bayonet-blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How cold steel is, and keen with hunger of blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue with all malice, like a madman’s flash;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thinly drawn with famishing for flesh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lend him to stroke these blind, blunt bullet-heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which long to muzzle in the hearts of lads.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or give him cartridges of fine zinc teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp with the sharpness of grief and death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For his teeth seem for laughing round an apple.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There lurk no claws behind his fingers supple;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God will grow no talons at his heels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor antlers through the thickness of his curls.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-dead-beat" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Dead-Beat</h2>
			<p>
				<span>He dropped⁠—more sullenly than wearily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay stupid like a cod, heavy like meat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none of us could kick him to his feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just blinked at my revolver, blearily;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Didn’t appear to know a war was on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or see the blasted trench at which he stared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’ll do ’em in,” he whined, “If this hand’s spared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll murder them, I will.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">A low voice said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It’s Blighty, p’raps, he sees; his pluck’s all gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreaming of all the valiant, that <em>aren’t</em> dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold uncles, smiling ministerially;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe his brave young wife, getting her fun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some new home, improved materially.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s not these stiffs have crazed him; nor the Hun.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We sent him down at last, out of the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwounded;⁠—stout lad, too, before that strafe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Malingering? Stretcher-bearers winked, “Not half!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next day I heard the <abbr>Doc.</abbr>’s well-whiskied laugh:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That scum you sent last night soon died. Hooray!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="s-i-w" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<abbr class="initialism">S. I. W.</abbr>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“I will to the King,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And offer him consolation in his trouble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that man there has set his teeth to die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And being one that hates obedience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discipline, and orderliness of life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot mourn him.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr class="name">W. B.</abbr> Yeats</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Patting goodbye, doubtless they told the lad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d always show the Hun a brave man’s face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father would sooner him dead than in disgrace⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was proud to see him going, aye, and glad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps his Mother whimpered how she’d fret</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he got a nice, safe wound to nurse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sisters would wish girls too could shoot, charge, curse, …</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brothers⁠—would send his favourite cigarette,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each week, month after month, they wrote the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking him sheltered in some <abbr>Y. M.</abbr> Hut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where once an hour a bullet missed its aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And misses teased the hunger of his brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes grew old with wincing, and his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckless with ague. Courage leaked, as sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the best sandbags after years of rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never leave, wound, fever, trench-foot, shock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untrapped the wretch. And death seemed still withheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For torture of lying machinally shelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the pleasure of this world’s Powers who’d run amok.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He’d seen men shoot their hands, on night patrol,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their people never knew. Yet they were vile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Death sooner than dishonour, that’s the style!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Father said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">One dawn, our wire patrol</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried him. This time, Death had not missed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We could do nothing, but wipe his bleeding cough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could it be accident?⁠—Rifles go off …</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not sniped? No. (Later they found the English ball.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was the reasoned crisis of his soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the fires that would not burn him whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But kept him for death’s perjury and scoff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And life’s half-promising, and both their riling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With him they buried the muzzle his teeth had kissed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truthfully wrote the Mother “Tim died smiling.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-show" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Show</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My soul looked down from a vague height with Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As unremembering how I rose or why,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw a sad land, weak with sweats of dearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gray, cratered like the moon with hollow woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fitted with great pocks and scabs of plaques.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Across its beard, that horror of harsh wire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There moved thin caterpillars, slowly uncoiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed they pushed themselves to be as plugs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ditches, where they writhed and shrivelled, killed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By them had slimy paths been trailed and scraped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round myriad warts that might be little hills.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From gloom’s last dregs these long-strung creatures crept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vanished out of dawn down hidden holes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>(And smell came up from those foul openings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As out of mouths, or deep wounds deepening.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On dithering feet upgathered, more and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brown strings towards strings of gray, with bristling spines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All migrants from green fields, intent on mire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those that were gray, of more abundant spawns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ramped on the rest and ate them and were eaten.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I saw their bitten backs curve, loop, and straighten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watched those agonies curl, lift, and flatten.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat, in terror what that sight might mean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I reeled and shivered earthward like a feather.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Death fell with me, like a deepening moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And He, picking a manner of worm, which half had hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its bruises in the earth, but crawled no further,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showed me its feet, the feet of many men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fresh-severed head of it, my head.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="futility" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Futility</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Move him into the sun⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently its touch awoke him once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home, whispering of fields unsown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always it woke him, even in France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until this morning and this snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If anything might rouse him now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kind old sun will know.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Think how it wakes the seeds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woke, once, the clays of a cold star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are limbs so dear-achieved, are sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-nerved⁠—still warm⁠—too hard to stir?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it for this the clay grew tall?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—O what made fatuous sunbeams toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break earth’s sleep at all?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="disabled" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Disabled</h2>
			<p>
				<span>He sat in a wheeled chair, waiting for dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shivered in his ghastly suit of grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Legless, sewn short at elbow. Through the park</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voices of boys rang saddening like a hymn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voices of play and pleasure after day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till gathering sleep had mothered them from him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>About this time Town used to swing so gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When glow-lamps budded in the light-blue trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And girls glanced lovelier as the air grew dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—In the old times, before he threw away his knees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now he will never feel again how slim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girls’ waists are, or how warm their subtle hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of them touch him like some queer disease.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was an artist silly for his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it was younger than his youth, last year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now he is old; his back will never brace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s lost his colour very far from here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured it down shell-holes till the veins ran dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half his lifetime lapsed in the hot race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leap of purple spurted from his thigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One time he liked a bloodsmear down his leg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the matches carried shoulder-high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was after football, when he’d drunk a peg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought he’d better join. He wonders why …</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone had said he’d look a god in kilts.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That’s why; and maybe, too, to please his Meg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye, that was it, to please the giddy jilts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He asked to join. He didn’t have to beg;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiling they wrote his lie; aged nineteen years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Germans he scarcely thought of; and no fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Fear came yet. He thought of jewelled hilts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For daggers in plaid socks; of smart salutes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And care of arms; and leave; and pay arrears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Esprit de corps; and hints for young recruits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon, he was drafted out with drums and cheers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some cheered him home, but not as crowds cheer Goal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a solemn man who brought him fruits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thanked him; and then inquired about his soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, he will spend a few sick years in Institutes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And do what things the rules consider wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take whatever pity they may dole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-night he noticed how the women’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed from him to the strong men that were whole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How cold and late it is! Why don’t they come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put him into bed? Why don’t they come?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="greater-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Greater Love</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Red lips are not so red</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the stained stones kissed by the English dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindness of wooed and wooer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems shame to their love pure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Love, your eyes lose lure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I behold eyes blinded in my stead!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Your slender attitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trembles not exquisite like limbs knife-skewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling and rolling there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where God seems not to care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the fierce Love they bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cramps them in death’s extreme decrepitude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Your voice sings not so soft⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though even as wind murmuring through raftered loft⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your dear voice is not dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentle, and evening clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As theirs whom none now hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now earth has stopped their piteous mouths that coughed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Heart, you were never hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor large, nor full like hearts made great with shot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though your hand be pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paler are all which trail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your cross through flame and hail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weep, you may weep, for you may touch them not.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-terre" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span xml:lang="fr">A Terre</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">(Being the Philosophy of Many Soldiers.)</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Sit on the bed; I’m blind, and three parts shell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be careful; can’t shake hands now; never shall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both arms have mutinied against me⁠—brutes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fingers fidget like ten idle brats.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I tried to peg out soldierly⁠—no use!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One dies of war like any old disease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This bandage feels like pennies on my eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have my medals?⁠—Discs to make eyes close.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My glorious ribbons?⁠—Ripped from my own back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In scarlet shreds. (That’s for your poetry book.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A short life and a merry one, my brick!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We used to say we’d hate to live dead old⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet now … I’d willingly be puffy, bald,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And patriotic. Buffers catch from boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least the jokes hurled at them. I suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little I’d ever teach a son, but hitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shooting, war, hunting, all the arts of hurting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, that’s what I learnt⁠—that, and making money.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fifty years ahead seem none too many?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me how long I’ve got? God! For one year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To help myself to nothing more than air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One Spring! Is one too good to spare, too long?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring wind would work its own way to my lung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grow me legs as quick as lilac-shoots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My servant’s lamed, but listen how he shouts!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I’m lugged out, he’ll still be good for that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in this mummy-case, you know, I’ve thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How well I might have swept his floors for ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d ask no night off when the bustle’s over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enjoying so the dirt. Who’s prejudiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a grimed hand when his own’s quite dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less live than specks that in the sun-shafts turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less warm than dust that mixes with arms’ tan?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d love to be a sweep, now, black as Town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, or a muckman. Must I be his load?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Life, Life, let me breathe⁠—a dug-out rat!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not worse than ours the existences rats lead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nosing along at night down some safe vat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They find a shell-proof home before they rot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead men may envy living mites in cheese,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or good germs even. Microbes have their joys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And subdivide, and never come to death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Certainly flowers have the easiest time on earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I shall be one with nature, herb, and stone.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shelley would tell me. Shelley would be stunned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dullest Tommy hugs that fancy now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pushing up daisies,” is their creed, you know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grain, then, go my fat, to buds my sap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the usefulness there is in soap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>D’you think the Boche will ever stew man-soup?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some day, no doubt, if …</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Friend, be very sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall be better off with plants that share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More peaceably the meadow and the shower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft rains will touch me⁠—as they could touch once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing but the sun shall make me ware.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your guns may crash around me. I’ll not hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if I wince, I shall not know I wince.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t take my soul’s poor comfort for your jest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soldiers may grow a soul when turned to fronds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here the thing’s best left at home with friends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My soul’s a little grief, grappling your chest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To climb your throat on sobs; easily chased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On other sighs and wiped by fresher winds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Carry my crying spirit till it’s weaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do without what blood remained these wounds.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-send-off" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Send-Off</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Down the close, darkening lanes they sang their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the siding-shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lined the train with faces grimly gay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Their breasts were stuck all white with wreath and spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men’s are, dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dull porters watched them, and a casual tramp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood staring hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorry to miss them from the upland camp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, unmoved, signals nodded, and a lamp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winked to the guard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So secretly, like wrongs hushed-up, they went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were not ours:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We never heard to which front these were sent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor there if they yet mock what women meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gave them flowers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shall they return to beatings of great bells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wild trainloads?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few, a few, too few for drums and yells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May creep back, silent, to still village wells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up half-known roads.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="mental-cases" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mental Cases</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Who are these? Why sit they here in twilight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore rock they, purgatorial shadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drooping tongues from jaws that slob their relish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baring teeth that leer like skulls’ tongues wicked?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stroke on stroke of pain⁠—but what slow panic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gouged these chasms round their fretted sockets?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever from their hair and through their hand palms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misery swelters. Surely we have perished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeping, and walk hell; but who these hellish?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—These are men whose minds the Dead have ravished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Memory fingers in their hair of murders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Multitudinous murders they once witnessed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wading sloughs of flesh these helpless wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treading blood from lungs that had loved laughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always they must see these things and hear them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Batter of guns and shatter of flying muscles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carnage incomparable and human squander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rucked too thick for these men’s extrication.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore still their eyeballs shrink tormented</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back into their brains, because on their sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunlight seems a bloodsmear; night comes blood-black;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dawn breaks open like a wound that bleeds afresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Thus their heads wear this hilarious, hideous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awful falseness of set-smiling corpses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Thus their hands are plucking at each other;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picking at the rope-knouts of their scourging;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatching after us who smote them, brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pawing us who dealt them war and madness.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="parable-of-the-old-men-and-the-young" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Parable of the Old Men and the Young</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So Abram rose, and clave the wood, and went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took the fire with him, and a knife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as they sojourned both of them together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isaac the first-born spake and said, My Father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold the preparations, fire and iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But where the lamb for this burnt-offering?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Abram bound the youth with belts and straps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And builded parapets and trenches there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stretchèd forth the knife to slay his son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When lo! an angel called him out of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, Lay not thy hand upon the lad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither do anything to him. Behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ram caught in a thicket by its horns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offer the Ram of Pride instead of him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the old man would not so, but slew his son. …</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="exposure" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Exposure</h2>
			<section id="exposure-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Our brains ache, in the merciless iced east winds that knife us …</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wearied we keep awake because the night is silent …</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low drooping flares confuse our memory of the salient …</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worried by silence, sentries whisper, curious, nervous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But nothing happens.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Watching, we hear the mad gusts tugging on the wire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like twitching agonies of men among its brambles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Northward incessantly, the flickering gunnery rumbles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off, like a dull rumour of some other war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">What are we doing here?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The poignant misery of dawn begins to grow …</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We only know war lasts, rain soaks, and clouds sag stormy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dawn massing in the east her melancholy army</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attacks once more in ranks on shivering ranks of gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But nothing happens.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sudden successive flights of bullets streak the silence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less deadly than the air that shudders black with snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sidelong flowing flakes that flock, pause and renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We watch them wandering up and down the wind’s nonchalance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But nothing happens.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="exposure-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Pale flakes with lingering stealth come feeling for our faces⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We cringe in holes, back on forgotten dreams, and stare, snow-dazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep into grassier ditches. So we drowse, sun-dozed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Littered with blossoms trickling where the blackbird fusses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Is it that we are dying?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Slowly our ghosts drag home: glimpsing the sunk fires glozed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crusted dark-red jewels; crickets jingle there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For hours the innocent mice rejoice: the house is theirs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shutters and doors all closed: on us the doors are closed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">We turn back to our dying.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Since we believe not otherwise can kind fires burn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever suns smile true on child, or field, or fruit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God’s invincible spring our love is made afraid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, not loath, we lie out here; therefore were born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For love of God seems dying.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To-night, His frost will fasten on this mud and us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrivelling many hands and puckering foreheads crisp.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The burying-party, picks and shovels in their shaking grasp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pause over half-known faces. All their eyes are ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But nothing happens.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="spring-offensive" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Spring Offensive</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Halted against the shade of a last hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fed, and, lying easy, were at ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, finding comfortable chests and knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carelessly slept. But many there stood still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To face the stark, blank sky beyond the ridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing their feet had come to the end of the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Marvelling they stood, and watched the long grass swirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the May breeze, murmurous with wasp and midge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though the summer oozed into their veins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the injected drug for their bones’ pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp on their souls hung the imminent line of grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearfully flashed the sky’s mysterious glass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hour after hour they ponder the warm field⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the far valley behind, where the buttercups</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had blessed with gold their slow boots coming up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where even the little brambles would not yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But clutched and clung to them like sorrowing hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They breathe like trees unstirred.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till like a cold gust thrilled the little word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At which each body and its soul begird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tighten them for battle. No alarms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bugles, no high flags, no clamorous haste⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a lift and flare of eyes that faced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun, like a friend with whom their love is done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O larger shone that smile against the sun⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mightier than his whose bounty these have spurned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, soon they topped the hill, and raced together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over an open stretch of herb and heather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exposed. And instantly the whole sky burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fury against them; and soft sudden cups</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened in thousands for their blood; and the green slopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chasmed and steepened sheer to infinite space.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of them who running on that last high place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leapt to swift unseen bullets, or went up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hot blast and fury of hell’s upsurge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or plunged and fell away past this world’s verge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some say God caught them even before they fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But what say such as from existence’ brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ventured but drave too swift to sink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The few who rushed in the body to enter hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there out-fiending all its fiends and flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With superhuman inhumanities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long-famous glories, immemorial shames⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crawling slowly back, have by degrees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regained cool peaceful air in wonder⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why speak they not of comrades that went under?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="smile-smile-smile" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Smile, Smile, Smile</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Head to limp head, the sunk-eyed wounded scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yesterday’s Mail; the casualties (typed small)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And (large) Vast Booty from our Latest Haul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also, they read of Cheap Homes, not yet planned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, said the paper, “When this war is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men’s first instinct will be making homes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile their foremost need is aerodromes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It being certain war has just begun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace would do wrong to our undying dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons we offered might regret they died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we got nothing lasting in their stead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must be solidly indemnified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though all be worthy Victory which all bought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rulers sitting in this ancient spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would wrong our very selves if we forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatest glory will be theirs who fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who kept this nation in integrity.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nation?⁠—The half-limbed readers did not chafe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But smiled at one another curiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like secret men who know their secret safe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the thing they know and never speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That England one by one had fled to France</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Not many elsewhere now save under France).</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pictures of these broad smiles appear each week,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And people in whose voice real feeling rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say: How they smile! They’re happy now, poor things.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>
					<time datetime="1918-09-23">23rd September 1918.</time>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
